Get more funding
If your business is up and running but needs more capital, you can rely on familiar options. However, funding an existing business still requires slightly different preparation.


Prepare to request more funding

Anyone who gives you funds wants to feel confident that their investment will pay off. Prepare a business case and financial statements to convince lenders, crowdfunders, or investors to fund your small business.

Make your business case
You’ll need to make a solid business case for more funding. Produce a short statement with the total requested amount and specific reasons for it.

Maybe your business is cyclical — like construction or education — and could use funding to get through expected slow periods. Or maybe it needs capital to invest in new machinery or launch a product line. Whatever the reason, update your business plan to include this stage of funding.

A business case should give assurances that new funds won’t be mismanaged. Include descriptions of your management team to highlight their skills and expertise.

Prepare financial statements
Display that your business is doing well with financial history statements. Show how your business has grown by reporting revenue, expenses, and profit over time. If you don’t have a history of positive growth, explain why more funding will allow you turn it around.

Prove you’re financially responsible with a business credit report. Review your business credit file to make sure it’s accurate before sharing it.

Determine how much your company is worth today by performing a business valuation. This is the same process you’d go through if you were planning to sell your business. Valuation methods vary, but you can do a self-evaluation or seek out a qualified business appraiser.

Show how your business will grow in the future with a forecast. Your business forecast can be based on intuitive judgement, quantitative analysis, or both. Show your projected revenue and expenses, and clearly explain how you arrived at those estimations.

Connect with a local SBA resource center
Meet with local experts, counselors, and business mentors at a local SBA resource center if you need help preparing your business to get more funding.


Choose your funding source

Get loans, credit, or crowdfunding
Additional funding options for existing business are similar to funding options for a new business. You’ll have the same general set of options, which include small business loans, credit cards, and crowdfunding.

Existing businesses have the advantage of an established financial history with credit reports, business bank accounts, and internal financial reports. Lenders, investors, and even crowdfunders can use that information when they decide whether to fund your business.

Sell ownership in your company
If you decide to sell an ownership stake of your company, your business structure will determine your options. Remember, whenever you sell ownership in your company, you dilute the ownership of current owners.

An LLC or a partnership can accept new members and give them a percentage of ownership in exchange for a capital investment. Just make sure you comply with your articles of organization and operating or partnership agreements. Then notify your state as necessary. Some states may require your LLC to be dissolved and re-formed with new membership.

Corporations can sell shares of the company, so long as it’s done in compliance with your articles of incorporation and bylaws. Again, notify your state if necessary.

Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans
If you have trouble getting a traditional business loan, look into SBA-guaranteed loans. When a bank thinks your business is too risky to lend money, SBA may guarantee your loan — that way the bank has less risk and could be more willing.

Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans

Expand to new locations
Once you’re ready to expand, update the marketing plan and confirm that your business is financially prepared. Then, make sure to comply with all laws, rules, and regulations in the new business locations.


Prepare for a new market

First, update your marketing plan with your new location in mind. Think about your target customer, sales plan, and competitive advantage. Add up any additional marketing and sales costs. Make sure your updated marketing plan is just as thorough as your initial plan.

Compare your business to the competition, learn about the local market, and get a sense of the advertising market.

Next, review your business finances. Build a forecast that projects estimated costs and estimated revenue for your new location. Take a close look at your balance sheet to make sure you can cover the costs of expanding. If you don’t have enough capital, you can try to get more funding.

Partnership
Partnerships are the simplest structure for two or more people to own a business together. There are two common kinds of partnerships: limited partnerships (LP) and limited liability partnerships (LLP).

Limited partnerships have only one general partner with unlimited liability, and all other partners have limited liability. The partners with limited liability also tend to have limited control over the company, which is documented in a partnership agreement. Profits are passed through to personal tax returns, and the general partner — the partner without limited liability — must also pay self-employment taxes.

Limited liability partnerships are similar to limited partnerships, but give limited liability to every owner. An LLP protects each partner from debts against the partnership, they won’t be responsible for the actions of other partners. 

Partnerships can be a good choice for businesses with multiple owners, professional groups (like attorneys), and groups who want to test their business idea before forming a more formal business.

Limited liability company (LLC) 
An LLC lets you take advantage of the benefits of both the corporation and partnership business structures.

LLCs protect you from personal liability in most instances, your personal assets — like your vehicle, house, and savings accounts — won’t be at risk in case your LLC faces bankruptcy or lawsuits.

Profits and losses can get passed through to your personal income without facing corporate taxes. However, members of an LLC are considered self-employed and must pay self-employment tax contributions towards Medicare and Social Security.

LLCs can have a limited life in many states. When a member joins or leaves an LLC, some states may require the LLC to be dissolved and re-formed with new membership — unless there’s already an agreement in place within the LLC for buying, selling, and transferring ownership.

LLCs can be a good choice for medium- or higher-risk businesses, owners with significant personal assets they want protected, and owners who want to pay a lower tax rate than they would with a corporation.

Corporation
C corp
A corporation, sometimes called a C corp, is a legal entity that’s separate from its owners. Corporations can make a profit, be taxed, and can be held legally liable.

Corporations offer the strongest protection to its owners from personal liability, but the cost to form a corporation is higher than other structures. Corporations also require more extensive record-keeping, operational processes, and reporting.

Unlike sole proprietors, partnerships, and LLCs, corporations pay income tax on their profits. In some cases, corporate profits are taxed twice — first, when the company makes a profit, and again when dividends are paid to shareholders on their personal tax returns.

Corporations have a completely independent life separate from its shareholders. If a shareholder leaves the company or sells his or her shares, the C corp can continue doing business relatively undisturbed.

Corporations have an advantage when it comes to raising capital because they can raise funds through the sale of stock, which can also be a benefit in attracting employees.

Corporations can be a good choice for medium- or higher-risk businesses, those that need to raise money, and businesses that plan to “go public” or eventually be sold.

S corp
An S corporation, sometimes called an S corp, is a special type of corporation that’s designed to avoid the double taxation drawback of regular C corps. S corps allow profits, and some losses, to be passed through directly to owners’ personal income without ever being subject to corporate tax rates.

Not all states tax S corps equally, but most recognize them the same way the federal government does and tax the shareholders accordingly. Some states tax S corps on profits above a specified limit and other states don’t recognize the S corp election at all, simply treating the business as a C corp.

S corps must file with the IRS to get S corp status, a different process from registering with their state.

There are special limits on S corps. Check the IRS website for eligibility requirements. You’ll still have to follow the strict filing and operational processes of a C corp.

S corps also have an independent life, just like C corps. If a shareholder leaves the company or sells his or her shares, the S corp can continue doing business relatively undisturbed.

S corps can be a good choice for a businesses that would otherwise be a C corp, but meet the criteria to file as an S corp.

Benefit corporation
A benefit corporation is a for-profit corporation recognized by a majority of U.S. states. Benefit corporations are different from C corps in purpose, accountability, and transparency, but aren’t different in how they’re taxed.

Benefit corporations are driven by both mission and profit. Shareholders hold the company accountable to produce some sort of public benefit in addition to a financial profit. Some states require benefit corporations to submit annual benefit reports that demonstrate their contribution to the public good.

There are several third-party benefit corporation certification services, but none are required for a company to be legally considered one in a state where the legal status is available.

Close corporation
Close corporations resemble B corps but have a less traditional corporate structure. These shed many formalities that typically govern corporations and apply to smaller companies. 

State rules vary, but shares are usually barred from public trading. Close corporations can be run by a small group of shareholders without a board of directors.

Nonprofit corporation
Nonprofit corporations are organized to do charity, education, religious, literary, or scientific work. Because their work benefits the public, nonprofits can receive tax-exempt status, meaning they don’t pay state or federal income taxes on any profits it makes.

Nonprofits must file with the IRS to get tax exemption, a different process from registering with their state.

Nonprofit corporations need to follow organizational rules very similar to a regular C corp. They also need to follow special rules about what they do with any profits they earn. For example, they can’t distribute profits to members or political campaigns.

Nonprofits are often called 501(c)(3) corporations — a reference to the section of the Internal Revenue Code that is most commonly used to grant tax-exempt status.

Cooperative
A cooperative is a business or organization owned by and operated for the benefit of those using its services. Profits and earnings generated by the cooperative are distributed among the members, also known as user-owners. Typically, an elected board of directors and officers run the cooperative while regular members have voting power to control the direction of the cooperative. Members can become part of the cooperative by purchasing shares, though the amount of shares they hold does not affect the weight of their vote.For guidance on deciding which methods are worthwhile for your small business, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) provides counseling services through our resource partner network.


Legal steps to expand your business

Expanding your business to a new state, county, or city isn’t very different from opening a new business there. You’ll want to make sure you register your business with the right agencies and pay the appropriate taxes.

License, permit, and zoning rules
These rules vary across states and localities. Getting licenses and permits in new locations is similar to getting them in your home state.

If you already have a permit or license from a federal agency, check with the issuing agency to confirm you can legally operate in a new state. Also, see whether your new state, county, and city governments require a new license or permit. Start by visiting your state’s website.

Foreign qualification
If you plan to expand your business to a new state, you might need to file for foreign qualification in that state. This process notifies the new state that your business is active there.

To foreign qualify, file a Certificate of Authority. Many states also require a Certificate of Good Standing from your state of formation. Each state charges a filing fee, but the amount varies by location and business structure.

Check with state offices to find out foreign qualification requirements and fees.

Pay taxes in new states and localities
If you do business in a new state as a foreign qualified business, you’ll typically need to pay taxes and annual report fees in the new state as well as your home state. The process for foreign qualified businesses to pay taxes is similar to any other business that needs to pay taxes in the state.

Keep in mind that not every state and locality has a sales tax. In addition, most states have tax exemptions on certain items, such as food or clothing. If you charge sales tax, you need to be familiar with applicable rates.

Pay taxes for online sales
If your business has a physical or economic presence in a state — such as a physical location, employees or a certain amount of income — you may have to collect applicable state and local sales tax from your customers in that state.  This presence is called a ‘nexus’. Most states have different standards for what establishes a nexus. 

Determining which sales tax to charge can be a challenge. Many retailers use online shopping cart software that automatically calculates sales tax rates. Make sure your sales plan accounts for the various state rates. Call your state’s Department of Revenue or local District Office to make sure you know what your state requires.


Franchising

There are two primary ways you could expand your business with franchising.

The first way is to buy an existing business or franchise. This option tends to cost more upfront, but can be less risky than trying to start from scratch.

The second way is to build your own franchise. Businesses that are good candidates for franchising have a few traits in common.

Product or service is superior and appeals to potential business owners
Concept and operations are easy to teach
Business is easy to duplicate in new markets
The federal government and many states have requirements that must be met in order for you to sell franchises, so you may want to hire an attorney. Once you’ve begun franchising, some states remain active in the relationship between you and your franchisees by monitoring territorial rights or limiting the transfer and renewal of your franchises.

Franchising has more costs than many other types of businesses. You’ll probably need to pay lawyers, accountants, and advertising staff. Don’t forget about training the employees and building systems you’ll need to run the franchise.

Merge and acquire businesses
You can grow your business by buying or merging with a smaller business. The process is similar to starting a new business, but you need to take extra steps to protect your existing business.


Differences between mergers and acquisitions

Mergers and acquisitions are similar but have a few major differences.

Mergers combine two separate businesses into a single new legal entity. True mergers are uncommon because it’s rare for two equal companies to mutually benefit from combining resources and staff, including their CEOs.

Unlike mergers, acquisitions do not result in the formation of a new company. Instead, the purchased company gets fully absorbed by the acquiring company. Sometimes this means the acquired company gets liquidated. Acquiring a business is similar to buying an existing business or franchise.


Calculate how much the other business is worth

Conduct a business valuation to determine the value of the other business before you agree to a sale. This is essentially the same process you’d go through to figure out how much your own business is worth before closing or selling your business.

There are several ways to value a business, so do extensive research on methods if you choose to do it on your own. You might want to hire a qualified business appraiser. Once you know how much the other business is worth, you’ll know whether you can afford it outright or if you need to get more funding.


Make a merger or acquisition agreement

You must prepare a sales agreement to move forward with the sale or merger. This document allows for the purchase of assets or stock of a corporation. An attorney should review it to make sure it’s accurate and comprehensive.

List all inventory in the sale along with names of the businesses and owners. Fill in the relevant background details. Determine how the business will be run prior to close and the level of access each company will have to financial information. Note all adjustments, broker fees, and any other aspects relevant to the terms of agreement.


Transfer business ownership

The terms of your agreement will dictate which steps you must take to transfer ownership, and what that ownership will look like. It’s widely recommended to have an attorney help with this step.

After you’ve completed the acquisition or merger, you’ll need to register these changes with the state, depending on state law and business structure.

If the merger requires you to dissolve your original company and create a new one, you might also need to open new business bank accounts, get new state and federal tax IDs, re-apply for licenses and permits, and take steps to legally close your old business.

Become a federal contractor
The federal government encourages small businesses to take on contracting opportunities. The process to register as a federal contractor is more straightforward than most people think.


Federal government contracting

The U.S. government is the world’s largest customer. It buys all types of products and services, and is required by law to provide opportunities for small businesses.

There are two broad categories of government contractors:

Prime contractors bid on and win contracts directly from government agencies.
Subcontractors join prime contractor teams, usually to provide a specific capability or product
For your small business to serve as a prime contractor or subcontractor, you’ll need to legally qualify as a small business and register as a government contractor. Then you can start looking for both prime or subcontracting opportunities with the federal government.


Comply with federal contracting rules

The federal government is very particular about how it purchases products and services. It aims to make sure that competition is fair and open, prices are competitive, it gets what it pays for, and all laws are followed.

Different rules and regulations apply to different types of federal purchases. The Federal Acquisition Regulation or Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement apply to most federal agencies, so you might want to read them over. Individual organizations often have their own rules as well.

Common rules include:

Size standards vary by industry and determine whether or not your business qualifies as small.
Sourcing rules that prevent your company from manufacturing your own materials
Legal requirements like the Buy American Act and the Trade Agreements Act
Limits to how much you can subcontract and who you can subcontract with
Minimum amounts for you to spend on work or materials for the contract
You should carefully document and report on your business activities to meet the federal government’s rules for procurement.

Small and disadvantaged businesses

The federal government tries to award a significant percentage of all federal government contracting dollars to small businesses. In addition, the federal government tries to award a certain percentage to businesses in the following categories.

Women-owned small businesses
Minority-owned businesses
Service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses
HUBZone program participants
The U.S. Small Business Administration’s (SBA) 8(a) Business Development program helps eligible socially and economically disadvantaged individuals grow their businesses through one-on-one counseling, training workshops, matchmaking opportunities with federal buyers, and other management and technical guidance.

Export products
Export goods to increase your profits, reduce market dependence, and stabilize seasonal sales. Connect with SBA resources and partners to get help exporting.


Benefits of exporting

Nearly 96% of consumers live outside the U.S., and two-thirds of the world’s purchasing power is in foreign countries. If you’re a small business owner, here’s how to work with the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) for your trade needs.


Get export and trade assistance

It may be easier to expand your market than you think. Even small businesses can get into exporting with the help of mentors and modern technology.

Trade Tools for International Sales
SBA’s Office of Manufacturing and Trade provides information on its Trade Tools for International Sales page to help small businesses explore opportunities in other markets. Learn about U.S. trade agreements, find information on regulations and laws, and explore programs and services for small businesses who want to go global.

U.S. Export Assistance Centers (USEACs)
USEACs help you explore the process of exporting at centers across the country. Each one is staffed by professionals from public and private organizations with experience in export assistance for small- and medium-sized businesses.

Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs)
SBDCs can also help. SBDCs are hosted by leading universities and state economic development agencies, and are partially funded through a partnership with SBA. Their advisors offer free business consulting and low-cost training services.

International Trade Hotline
SBA’s Office of Manufacturing and Trade can help any small business that faces barriers in accessing international markets. The office publicizes the small business benefits of U.S. trade agreements and helps protect the rights of small businesses under these agreements. Contact the toll-free trade hotline at 855-722-4877 or international@sba.gov.


Find international buyers

Many small business owners don’t realize foreign sales opportunities are well within reach. To reach them, all you need to do is take advantage of federal programs designed to build the bridge to new markets.

State Trade Expansion Program (STEP)
STEP provides financial awards to state and territory governments to help small businesses with export their products.

State-level STEP grants help small businesses:

Learn how to export
Participate in foreign trade missions and trade shows
Obtain services to support foreign market entry
Develop websites to attract foreign buyers
Design international marketing products or campaigns
Most states receive STEP support. Find out if your state does, then contact your local office to see how they can help you export your products and services.


Export finance programs

Most U.S. banks view loans for exporters as risky. This makes it harder for you to get loans for things like day-to-day operations, advance orders with suppliers, and refinancing existing debts. That’s why SBA created export finance programs to provide lenders with up to a 90% guaranty on export loans.

To learn more about SBA export finance programs, contact your local SBA finance manager or SBA’s Office of Manufacturing and Trade. 

Find a list of participating export lenders.


Additional trade resources

Trade.gov
Full list of government trade agencies
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Getting to Global’s Export Accelerator
Women-owned businesses
SBA helps women entrepreneurs launch new businesses and compete in the marketplace. Connect with the training and funding opportunities specifically for women.


Office of Women’s Business Ownership (OWBO)

The Office of Women’s Business Ownership (OWBO) helps women entrepreneurs through programs coordinated by SBA district offices. Programs include business training, counseling, federal contracts, and access to credit and capital.

The OWBO oversees Women’s Business Centers (WBCs). These centers seek to level the playing field for all women entrepreneurs, who still face unique obstacles in the business world.

Businesses receiving assistance from WBCs see a significantly better success rate than those without similar support. 


Support for women-owned small businesses

The 8(a) Business Development program helps small, disadvantaged businesses compete in the marketplace. Check with WBCs and local assistance resources for guidance, and our Lender Match tool for finding capital.

Women-owned small businesses can also take advantage of SBA loan programs. Our partners offer advice and counseling to help choose the right path for your company.

States tend to regulate a broader range of activities than the federal government. Business activities that are commonly regulated at the local level include:


Women-Owned Small Businesses (WOSB) Federal Contract program

This program helps women-owned small businesses compete for federal contracts. Understand the eligibility requirements before applying.

SBA also works with federal agencies to increase contracting opportunities and achieve the government’s 5% contracting goal for women-owned small businesses. Keep an eye out for matchmaking events targeting both the federal and private procurement.


Other resources for women-owned businesses

National Women’s Business Council
The National Women’s Business Council is a non-partisan federal advisory council serving as an independent source of advice and counsel to the President, Congress, and the U.S. Small Business Administration. The Council is the government’s only independent voice for women entrepreneurs, tackling important and relevant economic issues.

Get training online with DreamBuilder
DreamBuilder introduces participants to all areas of business ownership through a carefully crafted and engaging curriculum, featured in English and Spanish. At the conclusion of the program, women leave with a business plan to start their own business or develop an existing one.

Following are more partner resources on women-owned small business.

Association of Women’s Business Centers (AWBC)
National Association of Women in Construction
National Association of Women in Real Estate Businesses (NAWRB)
National Association of Women’s Business Owners (NAWBO)
U.S. Women’s Chamber of Commerce (USWCC)
Women’s Business Enterprise National Council (WBENC)
Women Impacting Public Policy (WIPP)
Women’s Presidents’ Organization (WPO)
Learn from successful women business owners
In SBA’s Winning Business: Resilient Stories of U.S. Small Business Owners video series, you can learn how women business owners around the country found help from SBA and our Resource Partner network.  Discover their greatest challenges, biggest opportunities, and lessons learned along the way. 

Native American-owned businesses
The federal government provides opportunities in contracting, business development, and other programs for Native American small business owners.


Office of Native American Affairs

The U.S. Small Business Administration’s (SBA) Office of Native American Affairs (ONAA) facilitates full access to business growth and expansion tools for small businesses owned by Native Americans. ONAA engages in tribal consultations, produces promotional materials, and participates in national economic development conferences.

American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians can use our local assistance tool to find nearby offices and resources. There, you can get counseling on whether our 8(a) Business Development Program is right for you.


Free technical assistance

ONAA offers free technical assistance for a variety of business types. Consider the following for technical assistance.

Group/Location	Purpose
National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development/Mesa, Arizona	Develops and expands the American Indian/Alaska Native private sector by providing and facilitating high quality development and support services to Native American-owned businesses, tribal enterprises, and individuals.
Our Native American Business Network (ONABEN) / Portland, Oregon and Tulsa, Oklahoma	Building Native American microenterprise capacity throughout Oklahoma, Texas and New Mexico. Native American entrepreneurs work together to grow in business.
Rural Enterprises of Oklahoma, Inc. (REI Oklahoma) / Durant, Oklahoma	Provides technical assistance to develop small businesses through customized training and webinar sessions. Learn about starting a business, understanding taxes, marketing, human resources, government contracting, and financial management.
Two Rivers Community Development Corporation/North Bend, Washington	Provides technical assistance that will be based on knowledge of the SBA 8(a) program and SBA’s standard operating procedures; also tribal sovereignty, tribal ordinances and knowledge of working in tribal communities.
Council on Native Hawaiian Advancement/ Kapolei, Hawaii	The ‘Oihana project is a small business development program that provides training, technical assistance, and networking opportunities to Native Hawaiian businesses/entrepreneurs.

Other federal programs

The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs provides services to federally recognized tribes. You can take advantage of education, job training, and employment opportunities. These are delivered through contracts, grants, and compacts to approximately 1.9 million American Indians and Alaska Natives.

For more information, visit the following federal programs.

U.S. Department of Agriculture: Office of Tribal Relations (OTR)
U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency: Federal Agencies Native American Offices, Programs, and Resources
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services: Administration for Native Americans

Additional Native American resources

SBA’s Office of Native American Affairs has contracted with the following companies to offer entrepreneurial empowerment workshops for Native American communities:

Sister Sky, Inc.
Additional resources are available through the following organizations:

Native American Finance Officers Association
National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development
Native American Contractors Association
National Congress of American Indians
Veteran-owned businesses
SBA offers support for veterans as they enter the world of business ownership. Look for funding programs, training, and federal contracting opportunities.

SBA has resources for every part of the veteran entrepreneurship journey. Watch videos of SBA’s recent virtual events for veterans and success stories to learn more.


Training programs

To help you succeed, our custom courses are available in-person and online. Learn the basics of owning a business and get access to SBA resources. You will also hear from small business experts. Read on to see what’s available.

Boots to Business training series
Boots to Business: Part of the U.S. Department of Defense Transition Assistance Program (TAP). Offered on military installations worldwide.
Boots to Business Reboot: Extends B2B to veterans of all eras in their communities. Includes National Guard and Reserve members.
Boots to Business Revenue Readiness: Turn a business idea to an into an actual model. Must first complete Boots to Business or Boots to Business Reboot. Six weeks, offered online.
Women Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Program (WVETP)
Training to start or grow a business. For women veterans and service members. SBA grants funding for these specialized entrepreneurship training programs to:

IVMF – Veteran Women Igniting the Spirit of Entrepreneurship (V-WISE)
Utah Veteran Business Resource Center – Startup Training Resources to Inspire Veteran Entrepreneurship (STRIVE)
ONABEN
Service-Disabled Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Program (SDVETP) 
For veterans injured in the line of duty who are or want to be small business owners. SBA grants funding for these specialized training programs to:

Veterans Entrepreneurship Program at Oklahoma State University
Entrepreneurship Bootcamp for Veterans at St. Joseph’s University
Warrior Rising, a nonprofit empowering veterans in business
Veteran Entrepreneurial Training & Resource Network
Resources for spouses
Support for military spouse entrepreneurs with training, counseling, and education. SBA offers the same flexible resources for spouses as for veteran business owners. Learn more about SBA resources for military spouse businesses.

Veteran Federal Procurement Entrepreneurship Training Program (VFPETP) 
Federal procurement training for currently involved or interested businesses. This nationwide training is open to veteran-owned and service-disabled veteran-owned businesses. Check out the Veteran Institute for Procurement (VIP) for more information.

Some states also require additional insurance. Laws requiring insurance vary by state. Visit your state’s website to find out the requirements for your business.  


Funding

Explore our loan programs to find the best loan for your business. To receive a list of authorized lenders in your area, use our Lender Match tool.

Have an employee in the Reserves or National Guard called to duty? The Military Reservist Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program (MREIDL) provides loans to help with losses. See if you qualify.


Federal contracting programs

The federal government awards an annual portion of its contracting dollars to veteran-owned businesses. These programs help veteran-owned small businesses access these contracts. See if you’re eligible.

Small businesses owned by veterans may also qualify to buy surplus government property.


Veterans in manufacturing

Explore resources to help your American manufacturing business boom. SBA and the federal government are supporting manufacturing businesses by cutting regulations, expanding access to capital, promoting workforce development, and creating a dedicated infrastructure to support small manufacturers.

If you are aware of a regulation that can harm or help manufacturing businesses, get in touch through SBA’s Red Tape Hotline.


Expert advice

Veterans Business Outreach Centers (VBOCs) are available nationwide. These centers offer business plan workshops, concept assessments, mentorship, and training. Available to eligible service members, veterans, National Guard & Reserve members. Find your nearest center.


Need help?

Military spouse businesses
SBA supports military spouse entrepreneurs with training, counseling, and other resources.

Supporting a military career can be a job all on its own. Military spouses looking to start or grow a small business need help. For this reason, SBA offers the same flexible resources for spouses as we do for veteran business owners. Explore SBA’s recent videos featuring virtual events for military spouses and success stories to learn about SBA resources for every part of the military spouse entrepreneurship journey.


Free training

SBA has programs available at over 180 locations and online. Read through to find what best suits your current needs:

Military Spouse Pathway to Business
Business ownership class specific to military spouses
For all military spouses
Offered virtually and in-person
Take at your own pace through SBA Learning
Boots to Business
Small business ownership basics, business plans, and resources
For spouses of active military members
Conducted on military bases
Boots to Business Reboot
Same content as Boots to Business
Available to spouses of veterans, National Guard or Reserves members
Offered online or in local communities
SBA also funds training programs through grantees such as:

Veteran Women Igniting the Spirit of Entrepreneurship (V-WISE)
Education and support to learn business and management skills
For spouses of honorably discharged veterans, including widowed spouses/partners, and active-duty service members
Offered online and in-person
Utah Veteran Business Resource Center at Salt Lake Community College: Startup Training Resources to Inspire Veteran Entrepreneurship (STRIVE)
10-week build-your-business course
For women who are spouses of active-duty military or veterans
Offered in-person (hybrid available for eligible students)
ONABEN
Training focused on stages of business growth
For spouses in Native and Indigenous communities
Offered in-person and online
Warrior Rising
Coaching and mentorship, including funding opportunities
For immediate family members of veterans
Online courses with in-person opportunities
Veteran Entrepreneurial Training & Resource Network (VETRN)
Mentoring support with access to financing sources and a referral network
For family members of veterans and National Guard or Reserve members
14 online classes

Funding and capital

Military spouse entrepreneurs can apply for any SBA-guaranteed loan. Explore our loan programs to find the best loan for your business. To receive a list of authorized lenders in your area, use our Lender Match tool.

SBA also has low-interest loans to help you recover from a disaster. 


Federal contracting programs

These programs help certain small businesses access federal contracts. Read on to see if you qualify.

8(a) Business Development program
HUBZone program
Women-Owned Small Business Federal Contract program

Expert advice

SBA provides one-on-one counseling nationwide. Find an SBA resource in your local community.

SBA District Offices
Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC) Program
Women’s Business Centers
Small Business Development Centers
SCORE
Military spouses interested in manufacturing should explore SBA’s resources for small business manufacturers. 

If you’re on LinkedIn Groups, join Military Spouses and Entrepreneurship. Connect with owners, experienced mentors, and DoD-certified counselors.


Need help?

Rural businesses
Rural small businesses are an integral part of local economies and communities. Learn more about SBA resources for rural businesses.


Disaster recovery

The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) offers several programs to help businesses financially recover from disasters.


SBA financing options

7(a) Loans, SBA’s largest financing program
If you’re unable to qualify for conventional financing and you meet the eligibility requirements, use a 7(a) loan to buy real estate, equipment or inventory for your small business. The loan may also be used for working capital, to refinance business debt, or purchase a small business. Find an SBA lender in your area by using the Lender Match tool.

504 Certified Development Company loan
For those who cannot find traditional financing but would like to purchase/renovate real estate or buy heavy equipment for a small business. The loan provides competitive fixed-rate mortgage financing through a lender and a Certified Development Company (CDC). For more information, or to inquire about loan application requirements, contact your local CDC.


Export assistance

Having trouble securing capital to meet your small business exporting needs? Use SBA international trade programs to cover short or long-term costs necessary to sell goods or services abroad. Loan proceeds can be used for working capital to finance foreign sales or fixed assets, helping you better compete globally. Apply for lines of credit prior to finalizing an export sale or contract and adequate financing will be in place by the time you win your contract.


Partnership with USDA

SBA has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) that commits to a deeper collaboration and coordination of resources.


Rural Opportunity Zones and HUBZones

SBA supports small business development in two significant place-based programs to encourage economic growth and prosperity in historically underserved communities:

Opportunity Zones
Created by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, this program allowed states to designate certain low-income census tracts as Opportunity Zones. Investors may defer, reduce, and eventually eliminate capital gains tax obligations provided they invest in eligible businesses located within Opportunity Zones and hold these qualifying investments for certain periods of time. The intent of this program is to direct realized capital gains into communities that have traditionally not benefited from this kind of investment, and to reward investors who choose to make long-term investments in underserved communities. Visit the U.S. Housing and Urban Developments Opportunity Zones website for more information. 

HUBZones
Businesses located in historically underused business zones (HUBZones) can gain special access to federal contracts. The program is easier to apply for and then maintain your certification. To qualify, your small business must:

Be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by U.S. citizens, a community development corporation, an agricultural cooperative, Indian tribal government, Alaska native corporation, or a native Hawaiian organization;
Have a principal office located in a HUBZone. Enter your address in our interactive map, maps.certify.sba.gov/hubzone/map, to see if you qualify;
Have at least 35% of your employees living in a HUBZone for a minimum of 180 days prior to applying.

Research and development

Much of the innovation in our country today comes from startups and small businesses. Small businesses conducting research and development create the devices, technologies, products, and platforms of the future. Entrepreneurs in rural areas are often looking for sources of funding, especially in earlier stages of research, and the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) or Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs are well-suited to meet that need.

America’s Seed Fund
The SBIR and the STTR programs, known as America’s Seed Fund, provide over $4 billion each year in early stage capital through a competitive awards process. Every year, participating federal agencies announce topic areas that address their R&D needs. The funding agency does not take an equity position or ownership of your business. The federal government also protects data rights and the ability to win sole-source phase three contracts. SBA’s Small Business Innovation Research program offers several ways to find funding opportunities, helpful tutorials, and news about past award winners such as Qualcomm, iRobot, Illumina, and Symantec. Use the local resources locator tool to identify state and regional programs and resources available to assist with grant writing, commercialization, and business counseling in your community.

Federal and State Technology (FAST) Partnership Program
The FAST program provides funding for one year to organizations to support delivery of regional and state programs that increase the number of SBIR/STTR proposals and provide technical assistance and mentoring to help awardees commercialize their technologies. This program is particularly impactful in rural states that may have fewer networks by which to provide this kind of assistance to applicants and awardees.

Minority-owned businesses
SBA is committed to supporting the development and growth of minority-owned small businesses and entrepreneurs from underserved communities.


Counseling and training

The U.S. Small Business Administration leverages its field offices, resource partners, and additional partnerships to help level the playing field for business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs who historically have lacked access to wealth or business opportunities.

SBA Resource partners
SBA works with independent organizations to provide high-quality counseling and training to meet the specific needs of new and existing small businesses. This resource partner network includes SCORE business mentors, Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs), Women’s Business Centers (WBCs), and Veterans Business Opportunity Centers (VBOCs). SBA resource partners provide counseling and training to business owners at all stages.

Federal partners
The U.S. Department of Commerce operates the Minority Business Development Agency, which is dedicated to the growth and global competitiveness of business enterprises owned and operated by African Americans, Asian Americans, Hasidic Jews, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, and Pacific Islanders.


Funding programs

The federal government does not provide grants to start a business. However, there are several funding programs to help entrepreneurs start, expand, or recover from disasters.

You can learn more about funding options for small business, including those targeted at minority and underserved communities, and get connected with SBA-approved lenders. SBA also offers several special COVID-19 relief options.


SBA contracting certifications and business development programs

8(a) Business Development program
The 8(a) Business Development program helps socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses grow by limiting competition for certain contracts to participating businesses, allowing them to become solid competitors in the federal marketplace. 

Disadvantaged businesses in the 8(a) program can:

Compete for set-aside and sole-source contracts in the program
Get a Business Opportunity Specialist to help navigate federal contracting
Form joint ventures with established businesses through the SBA’s Mentor-Protégé Program
Receive management and technical assistance, including business training, counseling, marketing assistance, and high-level executive development
Compete for contract awards under multiple socio-economic programs, as they apply
Before you can participate in the 8(a) Business Development program, you must meet certain criteria and be certified.

HUBZone program
The government limits competition for certain contracts to businesses in historically underutilized business zones. The program aims to award at least three percent of federal contract dollars each year to HUBZone-certified companies.  

SBA Mentor-Protégé Program 
The SBA Mentor-Protégé Program enables eligible small businesses (protégés) to get valuable business development help and win government contracts through partnerships with more experienced companies (mentors).  