Market research and competitive analysis
Market research helps you find customers for your business. Competitive analysis helps you make your business unique. Combine them to find a competitive advantage for your small business.


Use market research to find customers
+
Market research blends consumer behavior and economic trends to confirm and improve your business idea.

It’s crucial to understand your consumer base from the outset. Market research lets you reduce risks even while your business is still just a gleam in your eye.

Gather demographic information to better understand opportunities and limitations for gaining customers. This could include population data on age, wealth, family, interests, or anything else that’s relevant for your business.

Then answer the following questions to get a good sense of your market:

Demand: Is there a desire for your product or service?
Market size: How many people would be interested in your offering?
Economic indicators: What is the income range and employment rate?
Location: Where do your customers live and where can your business reach?
Market saturation: How many similar options are already available to consumers?
Pricing: What do potential customers pay for these alternatives?
You’ll also want to keep up with the latest small business trends. It’s important to gain a sense of the specific market share that will impact your profits.

You can do market research using existing sources, or you can do the research yourself and go direct to consumers.

Existing sources can save you a lot of time and energy, but the information might not be as specific to your audience as you’d like. Use it to answer questions that are both general and quantifiable, like industry trends, demographics, and household incomes. Check online or start with our list of market research resources.

Asking consumers yourself can give you a nuanced understanding of your specific target audience. But, direct research can be time consuming and expensive. Use it to answer questions about your specific business or customers, like reactions to your logo, improvements you could make to buying experience, and where customers might go instead of your business.

Here are a few methods you can use to do direct research:

Surveys
Questionnaires
Focus groups
In-depth interviews
For guidance on deciding which methods are worthwhile for your small business, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) provides counseling services through our resource partner network.


Use competitive analysis to find a market advantage
+
Competitive analysis helps you learn from businesses competing for your potential customers. This is key to defining a competitive edge that creates sustainable revenue.

Your competitive analysis should identify your competition by product line or service and market segment. Assess the following characteristics of the competitive landscape:

Market share
Strengths and weaknesses
Your window of opportunity to enter the market
The importance of your target market to your competitors
Any barriers that may hinder you as you enter the market
Indirect or secondary competitors who may impact your success
Several industries might be competing to serve the same market you’re targeting. Important factors to consider include level of competition, threat of new competitors or services, and the effect of suppliers and customers on price. Learn more in the Strategic Marketing Journey on SBA Learning.


Free small business data and trends
+
There are many reliable sources that provide customer and market information at no cost. Free statistics are readily available to help prospective small business owners.

Consider the following federal business statistics in your market research and competitive analysis:

Focus	Goal	Reference
General business statistics	Find information about business classifications and get data about your potential business market.	NAICS
U.S. Census Business Builder
Consumer statistics	Get info on current and past consumer credit statistics, and browse product safety reports from various industries.	Consumer Credit Data
Consumer Product Safety
Demographics	Segment the population for targeting customers.	U.S. Census Bureau
Bureau of Labor Statistics
Economic indicators	Stay aware of current unemployment rates, loans granted, and more.	Consumer Price Index
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Employment statistics	Dig deeper into employment trends for your market.	Employment and Unemployment Statistics
Income statistics	Pay your employees fair rates based on earnings data.	Earnings by Occupation and Education
Income Statistics
Money and interest rates	Keep money by mastering exchange and interest rates.	Daily Interest Rates
Money Statistics via Federal Reserve
Production and sales statistics	Understand demand, costs, and consumer spending.	Consumer Spending
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Trade statistics	Track indicators of sales and market performance.	Balance of Payments
International Trade
Statistics of specific industries	Use a wealth of federal agency data on industries.	Statistics of U.S. Businesses
Write your business plan
Your business plan is the foundation of your business. Learn how to write a business plan quickly and efficiently with a business plan template.


Business plans help you run your business
+
A good business plan guides you through each stage of starting and managing your business. You’ll use your business plan as a roadmap for how to structure, run, and grow your new business. It’s a way to think through the key elements of your business. Your research can also help you later in your planning. For example, knowing your NAICS code could help you with market analysis, insurance, and taxes.

Business plans can help you get funding or bring on new business partners. Investors want to feel confident they’ll see a return on their investment. Your business plan is the tool you’ll use to convince people that working with you — or investing in your company — is a smart choice.


Pick a business plan format that works for you
+
There’s no right or wrong way to write a business plan. What’s important is that your plan meets your needs.

Most business plans fall into one of two common categories: traditional or lean startup.

Traditional business plans are more common, use a standard structure, and encourage you to go into detail in each section. They tend to require more work upfront and can be dozens of pages long.

Lean startup business plans are less common but still use a standard structure. They focus on summarizing only the most important points of the key elements of your plan. They can take as little as one hour to make and are typically only one page.

Use our tips to build your own business plan, or download examples.

Traditional business plan
This type of plan is very detailed, takes more time to write, and is comprehensive. Lenders and investors commonly request this plan.

General guidance
You might prefer a traditional business plan format if you’re very detail-oriented, want a comprehensive plan, or plan to request financing from traditional sources.

When you write your business plan, you don’t have to stick to the exact business plan outline. Instead, use the sections that make the most sense for your business and your needs. Explore the nine most common sections, or download fictional examples of a traditional business plan from Rebecca, who owns a consulting firm, or Andrew, who owns a toy company.

Common traditional business plan sections
Executive summary
Briefly tell your reader what your company is and why it will be successful. Include your mission statement, your product or service, and basic information about your company’s leadership team, employees, and location. You should also include financial information and high-level growth plans if you plan to ask for financing.

Company description
Use your company description to provide detailed information about your company. Go into detail about the problems your business solves. Be specific, and list out the consumers, organization, or businesses your company plans to serve.

Explain the competitive advantages that will make your business a success. Are there experts on your team? Have you found the perfect location for your store? Your company description is the place to boast about your strengths.

Market analysis
You’ll need a good understanding of your industry outlook and target market. Competitive research will show you what other businesses are doing and what their strengths are. In your market research, look for trends and themes. What do successful competitors do? Why does it work? Can you do it better? Now’s the time to answer these questions.

Organization and management
Tell your reader how your company will be structured and who will run it.

Describe the legal structure of your business. State whether you have or intend to incorporate your business as a C or an S corporation, form a general or limited partnership, or if you’re a sole proprietor or limited liability company (LLC).

Use an organizational chart to lay out who’s in charge of what in your company. Show how each person’s unique experience will contribute to the success of your venture. Consider including resumes and CVs of key members of your team.

Service or product line
Describe what you sell or what service you offer. Explain how it benefits your customers and what the product lifecycle looks like. Share your plans for intellectual property, like copyright or patent filings. If you’re doing research and development for your service or product, explain it in detail.

Marketing and sales
There’s no single way to approach a marketing strategy. Your strategy should evolve and change to fit your unique needs.

Your goal in this section is to describe how you’ll attract and retain customers. You’ll also describe how a sale will actually happen. You’ll refer to this section later when you make financial projections, so make sure to thoroughly describe your complete marketing and sales strategies.

Funding request
If you’re asking for funding, this is where you’ll outline your funding requirements. Your goal is to clearly explain how much funding you’ll need over the next five years and what you’ll use it for.

Specify whether you want debt or equity, the terms you’d like applied, and the length of time your request will cover. Give a detailed description of how you’ll use your funds. Specify if you need funds to buy equipment or materials, pay salaries, or cover specific bills until revenue increases. Always include a description of your future strategic financial plans, like paying off debt or selling your business.

Financial projections
Supplement your funding request with financial projections. Your goal is to convince the reader that your business is stable and will be a financial success.

If your business is already established, include income statements, balance sheets, and cash flow statements for the last three to five years. If you have other collateral you could put against a loan, make sure to list it now.

Provide a prospective financial outlook for the next five years. Include forecasted income statements, balance sheets, cash flow statements, and capital expenditure budgets. For the first year, be even more specific and use quarterly — or even monthly — projections. Make sure to clearly explain your projections, and match them to your funding requests.

This is a great place to use graphs and charts to tell the financial story of your business.  

Download Rebecca’s traditional business plan

Download Andrew’s traditional business plan

Lean startup plan
This type of plan is high-level focus, fast to write, and contains key elements only. Some lenders and investors may ask for more information.

General guidance
You might prefer a lean startup format if you want to explain or start your business quickly, your business is relatively simple, or you plan to regularly change and refine your business plan.

Lean startup formats are charts that use only a handful of elements to describe your company’s value proposition, infrastructure, customers, and finances. They’re useful for visualizing tradeoffs and fundamental facts about your company.

Explore the nine most common sections, or download an example of a lean startup business plan written by a fictional business owner, Andrew, who owns a toy company.

Common lean startup plan sections
There are different ways to develop a lean startup template. You can search the web to find free templates to build your business plan. We discuss nine components of a model business plan here:

Key partnerships
Note the other businesses or services you’ll work with to run your business. Think about suppliers, manufacturers, subcontractors, and similar strategic partners.

Key activities
List the ways your business will gain a competitive advantage. Highlight things like selling direct to consumers, or using technology to tap into the sharing economy.

Key resources
List any resource you’ll leverage to create value for your customer. Your most important assets could include staff, capital, or intellectual property. Don’t forget to leverage business resources that might be available to women, veterans, Native Americans, and HUBZone businesses.

Value proposition
Make a clear and compelling statement about the unique value your company brings to the market.

Customer relationships
Describe how customers will interact with your business. Is it automated or personal? In person or online? Think through the customer experience from start to finish.

Customer segments
Be specific when you name your target market. Your business won’t be for everybody, so it’s important to have a clear sense of whom your business will serve.

Channels
List the most important ways you’ll talk to your customers. Most businesses use a mix of channels and optimize them over time.

Cost structure
Will your company focus on reducing cost or maximizing value? Define your strategy, then list the most significant costs you’ll face pursuing it.

Revenue streams
Explain how your company will actually make money. Some examples are direct sales, memberships fees, and selling advertising space. If your company has multiple revenue streams, list them all.

Download Andrew’s lean business plan

Calculate your startup costs
How much money will it take to start your small business? Calculate the startup costs for your small business so you can request funding, attract investors, and estimate when you’ll turn a profit.


Calculate your business startup costs before you launch
+
The key to a successful business is preparation. Before your business opens its doors, you’ll have bills to pay. Understanding your expenses will help you launch successfully.

Calculating startup costs helps you:

Estimate profits
Conduct a break-even analysis
Secure loans
Attract investors
Save money with tax deductions
Use this break-even analysis calculator to discover your break-even point and determine your futurre profits.


Break-even point
+
The break-even point is the point at which total cost and total revenue are equal, meaning there is no loss or gain for your small business. In other words, you’ve reached the level of production at which the costs of production equals the revenues for a product.

For any new business, this is an important calculation in your business plan. Potential investors in a business not only want to know the return to expect on their investments, but also the point when they will realize this return. This is because some companies may take years before turning a profit, often losing money in the first few months or years before breaking even. For this reason, break-even point is an important part of any business plan presented to a potential investor.

For existing businesses, this can be a useful tool not only in analyzing costs and evaluating profits they’ll earn at different sales volumes, but also to prove their potential turnaround after disaster scenarios.

Benefits of a break-even analysis
Price smarter
Finding your break-even point will help you price your products smarter. A lot of psychology goes into pricing, but knowing how it will affect your profitability is just as important. Especially, when making sure that you can pay all your bills.

Catch missing expenses
It’s easy to overlook expenses when you’re thinking through a new business idea. When you complete the break-even analysis, you have all of your financial commitments figured out, limiting surprises in the future.

Set revenue targets
After completing the analysis, you will know exactly how much you need to sell in order to be profitable. This sets sales goals for your business. When you have a number in mind, it will be easier to follow through.

Make smarter decisions
Helps limit business decisions made on emotions. How you feel is important, but it shouldn’t be the base of your business decisions. The break-even analysis will help you start your business based on facts.

Limit financial strain
Mitigates risk by showing when to avoid a business idea. It helps potential businesses avoid failure as well as limit the financial toll of a bad idea through realistic analysis of potential outcomes.

Fund your business
The break-even analysis is usually a requirement in order to take on investors or debt to fund your business. It proves that your plan is viable, which will also help you feel better about taking on financing.

Getting started
Create your break-even analysis with this calculator and determine your business’s break-even point in units using the following formula:

Fixed Costs ÷ (Price – Variable Costs) = Break-Even Point in Units

What you need to get started:
This analysis will help you easily prepare an estimate and visual to include in your business plan. We’ll do the math and all you will need is an idea of the following information.

Your business’s estimated fixed costs
Your business’s selling price per unit
Your business’s projected unit sales
Your business’s estimated variable cost per unit
Start your break-even analysis
Tips and tricks
Use the break-even formula. This break-even analysis is based on the foundation of a single product or service. To calculate the break-even point in units we use the formula: Break-even point (units) = fixed costs ÷ (sales price per unit – variable cost per unit). Or in sales dollars, using the formula: Break-even point (sales dollars) = fixed costs ÷ contribution margin. Contribution Margin is the difference between the price of a product and what it costs to make that product. That calculation is: Contribution margin = (sale price per unit – variable cost per unit) ÷ sale price per unit.
Calculate multiple products or services. The total fixed costs, variable costs, unit or service sales are calculated on a monthly basis in this calculator. Meaning that adding the total for all products and services monthly should account for all products and services. You may also want to do the calculation individually for each product or service if the products or service sales vary per month. Remember the break-even point is used as an estimate for lender viability and your business plan. It is not intended to 100% accurately determine your accounting or financing since those calculations can only be done after all costs and production have occurred. It’s also a good idea to throw a little extra, say 10%, into your break-even analysis to cover miscellaneous expenses that you can’t predict.
Learn about fixed costs. Fixed costs are costs incurred during a specific period of time that do not change with the increase or decrease in production or services. Once established, fixed costs do not change over the life of an agreement or cost schedule. For this calculator, we are calculating the fixed costs on a monthly basis. If you have fixed costs that do not incur monthly you should still include them, but calculate the monthly amount that goes towards that expense. For example, if something is paid for on a quarterly basis, but does not change with production you would divide that cost by four in order to estimate the monthly amount of that cost. In the break-even analysis, we will help you break down the potential fixed costs related to your business. Examples of fixed costs include rental lease payments, salaries, property taxes, insurance, interest, and depreciation.
Learn about semi-variable costs. Sometimes determining whether a cost is fixed or variable is more complicated.

There is also a category of costs that falls in between, known as semi-variable costs (also known as semi-fixed costs or mixed costs). These are costs composed of a mixture of both fixed and variable components. Costs are fixed for a set level of production or consumption and become variable after this production level is exceeded. If no production occurs, a fixed cost is often still incurred.

The best way to include these costs is to separate out the part that is variable from the part that is fixed. These may include minimum payments or fees for services and products. For the break-even analysis to be as accurate as possible it is important to separate any semi-variable costs into their fixed and variable parts if possible. Examples of semi-variable costs include monthly telephone services, repairs, indirect materials, indirect labor, fuel, and power.


Identify your startup expenses
+
Most businesses fall into one of three categories: brick-and-mortar businesses, online businesses, and service providers. You’ll face different startup expenses depending on your business type.

Brick and mortar
Online
Service
There are common startup costs you’re likely to have no matter what. Look through the following list, and make sure to add any other expenses that are unique to your business:

Office space
Equipment and supplies
Communications
Utilities
Licenses and permits
Insurance
Lawyer and accountant
Inventory
Employee salaries
Advertising and marketing
Market research
Printed marketing materials
Making a website

Estimate how much your expenses will cost
+
Once you have your list of expenses, you can estimate how much they’ll actually cost. This process will be different for each expense you have.

Some expenses will have well-defined costs — permits and licenses tend to have clear, published costs. You might have to estimate other costs that are less certain, like employee salaries. Look online and talk directly to mentors, vendors, and service providers to see what similar companies pay for expenses.


Add up your expenses for a full financial picture
+
Once you’ve identified your business expenses and how much they’ll cost, you should organize your expenses into one-time expenses and monthly expenses.

One-time expenses are the initial costs needed to start the business. Buying major equipment, hiring a logo designer, and paying for permits, licenses, and fees are generally considered to be one-time expenses. You can typically deduct one-time expenses for tax purposes, which can save you money on the amount of taxes you’ll owe. Make sure to keep track of your expenses and talk to your accountant when it’s time to file your taxes.

Monthly expenses typically include things like salaries, rent, and utility bills. You’ll want to count at least one year of monthly expenses, but counting five years is ideal.

Add up your one-time and monthly expenses to get a good picture of how much capital you’ll need and when you’ll need it. The SBA franchise directory helps lenders and CDCs to evaluate the eligibility of small businesses that operate under a franchising agreement.


Use your startup cost calculations to get startup funding
+
It’s a good idea to create a formal report of your expected startup costs.

You want it in a format that’s clear and easy to understand. Investors and lenders compare expected costs to projected revenue and determine the potential for your business to profit.

Download this fillable PDF to calculate your small business startup costs.

Establish business credit
As you work to understand your startup costs and expenses, you’ll also want to make sure your credit is in good stead. Poor credit history is one of the main reasons why loan applications for small businesses are often declined. Poor credit history can also impact insurance rates and the attractiveness of your business to potential partners, suppliers, and vendors.

That’s why cultivating and maintaining good credit scores — for both your personal and business lines of credit — is so important.


Maintain good personal and business credit history
+
Existing businesses have the advantage of an established financial history. But loan eligibility for a new business is typically based on its owner’s personal credit score.

While not every small business owner has good credit, some may in the first stages of establishing credit. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) offers tips to help people with limited credit histories get started.

CFPB’s Credit Reports and Scores webpage is a good place for most people looking to burnish their credit history and improve their scores. If your credit history needs help, the Federal Trade Commission has recommendations for improving your credit.


Apply for business credit
+
Establishing and managing business credit can help your company secure financing when you need it and with better terms. It can also help you negotiate supply agreements and protect against business identity theft.

One of the first steps you’ll want to take is to register for a Dun & Bradstreet number, or DUNS number. A DUNS number is a unique nine-digit identification number for each physical location of your business. Dun & Bradstreet also offers guidance on how to build business credit.

Before you shop for a loan or line of credit, learn how the law protects against discrimination. This functionality is coming soon.


Check and monitor your credit
+
It’s important to monitor both your personal and business credit reports, especially if you believe you have been the subject of identity theft.

To monitor your personal credit, visit the Annual Credit Report website, the only authorized source for the free reports guaranteed by law.
To monitor your business credit, you can get a copy of your company’s report from Experian, Equifax, Dun & Bradstreet, or other several smaller credit reporting services.
Fund your business

Determine how much funding you’ll need
+
Every business has different needs, and no financial solution is one-size-fits-all. Your personal financial situation and vision for your business will shape the financial future of your business.

Once you know how much startup funding you’ll need, it’s time to figure out how you’ll get it.

Loans
Self-funding
Investors

Fund your business yourself with self-funding
+
Otherwise known as bootstrapping, self-funding lets you leverage your own financial resources to support your business. Self-funding can come in the form of turning to family and friends for capital, using your savings accounts, or even tapping into your 401(k).

With self-funding, you retain complete control over the business, but you also take on all the risk yourself. Be careful not to spend more than you can afford, and be especially careful if you choose to tap into retirement accounts early. You might face expensive fees or penalties, or damage your ability to retire on time — so you should check with your plan’s administrator and a personal financial advisor first.


Get venture capital from investors
+
Investors can give you funding to start your business in the form of venture capital investments. Venture capital is normally offered in exchange for an ownership share and active role in the company.

Venture capital differs from traditional financing in a number of important ways. Venture capital typically:

Focuses high-growth companies
Invests capital in return for equity, rather than debt (it’s not a loan)
Takes higher risks in exchange for potential higher returns
Has a longer investment horizon than traditional financing
Almost all venture capitalists will, at a minimum, want a seat on the board of directors. So be prepared to give up some portion of both control and ownership of your company in exchange for funding.

How to get venture capital funding
There’s no guaranteed way to get venture capital, but the process generally follows a standard order of basic steps.

Find an investor 
Look for individual investors — sometimes called “angel investors” — or venture capital firms. Be sure to do enough background research to know if the investor is reputable and has experience working with startup companies.
Share your business plan 
The investor will review your business plan to make sure it meets their investing criteria. Most investment funds concentrate on an industry, geographic area, or stage of business development.
Go through due diligence review 
The investors will look at your company’s management team, market, products and services, corporate governance documents, and financial statements.
Work out the terms 
If they want to invest, the next step is to agree on a term sheet that describes the terms and conditions for the fund to make an investment.
Investment
Once you agree on a term sheet, you can get the investment! Once a venture fund has invested, it becomes actively involved in the company. Venture funds normally come in “rounds.” As the company meets milestones, further rounds of financing are made available, with adjustments in price as the company executes its plan.

Use crowdfunding to fund your business
+
Crowdfunding raises funds for a business from a large number of people, called crowdfunders. Crowdfunders don’t generally receive a share of ownership in the business and don’t expect a financial return on their money.

Instead, crowdfunders expect to get a “gift” from your company as thanks for their contribution. Often, that gift is the product you plan to sell or other special perks, like meeting the business owner or getting their name in the credits. This makes crowdfunding a popular option for people who want to produce creative works (like a documentary), or a physical product (like a high-tech cooler).

Crowdfunding is also popular because it’s very low risk for business owners. Not only do you get to retain full control of your company, but if your plan fails, you’re typically under no obligation to repay your crowdfunders. Every crowdfunding platform is different, so make sure to read the fine print and understand your full financial and legal obligations.


Get a small business loan
+
If you want to retain complete control of your business, but don’t have enough funds to start, consider a small business loan.

To increase your chances of securing a loan, you should have a business plan, expense sheet, and financial projections for the next five years. These tools will give you an idea of how much you’ll need to ask for, and will help the bank know they’re making a smart choice by giving you a loan.

Once you have your materials ready, contact banks and credit unions to request a loan. You’ll want to compare offers to get the best possible terms for your loan.


Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans
+
If you have trouble getting a traditional business loan, you should look into SBA-guaranteed loans. When a bank thinks your business is too risky to lend money to, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) can agree to guarantee your loan. That way, the bank has less risk and is more willing to give your business a loan.

Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans.


SBA investment programs
+
Small Business Investment Company (SBIC)
SBICs are privately owned and managed investment funds licensed and regulated by SBA. They use their own capital, plus funds borrowed with an SBA guarantee, to make equity and debt investments in qualifying small businesses. Learn more about SBICs to see if your business might qualify.

Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program
This program encourages small businesses to engage in federal research and development that has the potential for commercialization. Find out if the SBIR’s competitive awards-based program makes sense for you.

Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program
This program offers funding opportunities in the federal innovation research and development arena. Small businesses who qualify for this program work with nonprofit research institutions in the early and intermediate stages of starting up. Find out if the STTR program makes sense for your business.

Buy an existing business or franchise
Starting a business from scratch can be challenging. Franchising or buying an existing business can simplify the initial planning process.


Know the difference between franchising and buying a business
+
Before you decide if one of these options is right for you, make sure you know the basics of franchising and buying an existing business. The main difference between franchising and buying an existing business is the level of control you’ll have over your business.

Franchising gives you more guidance but less control
A franchise is a business model where one business owner (the “franchisor”) sells the rights to their business logo, name, and model to an independent entrepreneur (the “franchisee”). Restaurants, hotels, and service-oriented businesses are commonly franchised.

Two common forms of franchising are:

Product/trade name franchising: The franchisor owns the right to the name or trademark of a business, and sells the right to use that name and trademark to a franchisee. This style of franchising normally focuses on supply chain management. Typically, products are manufactured or supplied by the franchisor and delivered to the franchisee to sell.
Business format franchising: The franchisor and franchisee have an ongoing relationship. This style of franchising normally focuses on full-spectrum business management. Typically, the franchisor offers services like site selection, training, product supply, marketing plans, and even help getting funding.
When you buy a franchise, you get the right to use the name, logo, and products of a larger brand. You’ll also get to benefit from brand recognition, promotions, and marketing. But, it also means you have to follow rules from the larger brand about how you run your business.

Buying an existing business gives you more control but less guidance
Buying an existing business is exactly what it sounds like. The buyer typically takes over full ownership of the business. The largest advantage is having an existing blueprint that can include important factors like an established customer base, defined operating expenses, and fully trained employees. Regardless of business type, almost any kind of business could be bought or sold.

When you buy an existing business, you typically get complete control over its direction. However, with no set vision, infrastructure, or external guidance, your business could struggle as you figure out the best way to run things. SBA’s Surety Bond Guarantee (SBG) Program enables surety companies and agents to issue bonds backed by the SBA. This helps small businesses obtain contract surety when they might otherwise face barriers.


Consider three factors before franchising or buying a business
+
Though the business models differ, there are three common steps to take that will help you determine whether you should franchise or buy a business.

Quantify your investment: Review your financial landscape and decide how much you’re willing to spend to purchase — and ultimately manage — the business. This will help you determine what type of businesses or brands are best for your budget.
Consider your talents and lifestyle: Be honest about your skills and experience, as they can help you eliminate unrealistic business ventures. For example, if you prefer hands-on assistance, then franchising might be best for you. On the contrary, if you’re an experienced business owner, you may want to consider buying an existing business.
Review the full landscape: Look at the existing infrastructure and make sure you understand everything that comes along with the purchase. Don’t be afraid to ask questions about contracts, leases, existing cash flow, and inventory. The more you know, the better equipped you’ll be to make a sound decision.
Quantify your investment.
Consider your talent and life.
Review the full landscape.
Pick the right franchise or existing business for you
Once you know whether you want to franchise or buy a business, you’ll need to evaluate each specific opportunity. In short, it boils down to this: do your due diligence.

Your research should help you understand the business from both a financial standpoint and in the overall landscape.

If you’re interested in franchising, you should explore:

Any and all existing reports: Now’s the time to put your detective hat on. To start, get a Uniform Franchise Offering Circular (UFOC). This form contains vital details about the franchise’s legal, financial, and personnel history.
Associated rules and regulations: Every franchise is different. Confirm that you’ll have the right to use the franchise name, trademark, and do business in an area protected from other franchisees. You can also find out if you’ll get training and management help from the franchisor, and be able to use the franchisor’s expertise in marketing and advertising.
Contracts: The contract between the two parties usually benefits the franchisor more than the franchisee. The franchisee generally needs to meet sales quotas and buy equipment, supplies, and inventory. Make sure you understand it all before signing.
If you’re interested in buying an existing business, you’ll want to look into:

Licenses and permits: You’ll need to get any needed licenses and permits from the current owner or apply for them yourself. Find out which federal, state, and local permits and licenses you’ll need to run your business.
Zoning requirements: Zoning requirements may affect your business. Make sure your business follows all the basic zoning laws in your area.
Environmental concerns: If you’re buying real property along with the business, it’s important to check the environmental regulations in the area.
The value of the business: There are many different methods to determine a fair price for the sale of the business. Here are a few:
Capitalized earning approach: This method refers to the return on the investment that the investor expects.
Excess earning method: Like the capitalized earning method, except it separates return on assets from other earnings.
Cash flow method: This method is typically used to determine how much of a loan the business’ cash flow can support.
Tangible assets (balance sheet) method: This method values the business by the tangible assets.
Value of specific intangible assets method: This method compares buying a wanted intangible asset versus creating it.

Get ready to buy your franchise or business
+
Once you’ve found a franchise or business to buy, it’s important to conduct a thorough, objective investigation.

At this stage, you’ll probably want professional help. Consider hiring an attorney and an accountant. The tax rules surrounding franchises in particular are often complex. A specialist in franchise law can assist you with evaluating the franchise package and tax considerations. An accountant can help you determine the full costs of purchasing and operating the business, and even help estimate potential profit.

An attorney and an accountant together can help you create and evaluate important documents. Typically that includes the following:

Letter of intent
Confidentiality agreement
Contracts and leases
Financial statements
Tax returns
Sales agreement
Purchase price adjustment
Explore resources from the Federal Trade Commission to help you buy a franchise. To see if any particular franchise is eligible for SBA financial assistance, you can search the SBA Franchise Directory.


SBA Franchise Directory
+
Download the directory 
Purpose and eligibility
The SBA Franchise Directory contains all franchises and other brands eligible for SBA financial assistance. It only includes business models that are reviewed and found eligible by SBA. Lenders will be able to rely on the Directory and will no longer need to review franchise or other brand documentation for affiliation or eligibility. This includes brands that:

Meet the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) definition of a franchise
These brands must be in the directory to obtain SBA financing
Appear to be franchises, but do not meet the FTC definition
SBA will include these brands in the directory if they ask for it, and if they are otherwise eligible
Have relationships established under a license, jobber, dealer or similar that SBA determines meets the FTC’s definition of a franchise
Placement of a franchise brand in the directory:

is not an endorsement or approval of the brand, and
does not ensure the success of the business
The directory will be updated weekly. 

Submit a brand for review
To submit a brand for review by the SBA Franchise Team, please submit the following to franchise@sba.gov:

Complete copies of the franchise, license, dealer, jobber, or similar agreement(s) for this brand
The Franchise Disclosure Document (if applicable)
Any other documents an SBA applicant would be required to sign
If you are not the franchisor/licensor/fuel supplier/etc., please also provide their email. Only the franchisor/licensor/fuel supplier/etc., has the authority to confirm that the SBA Franchise Team has been given complete copies of all required documents.

New brands are reviewed in the order in which they are received.

Please note that:

Placement of a franchise brand in the Directory is not an endorsement or approval of the brand and does not ensure the success of the business.
If SBA determines your brand meets the FTC definition of a franchise, you will be required to submit a properly executed Franchisor (or Distributor, if applicable) Certification. This will be necessary to complete the placement of the brand on the Directory.